Now that you know about complex numbers and how to work with complex numbers and you know a little bit
about the natural exponent or e to the X you are ready to learn the complex roots of unity.
Now this sounds like a really bizarre kind of magical mysterious term.
So what is the roots of unity.
Maybe you think that this is some like something from a fantasy book like there's this special magical
tree in the land of unity and its roots have magical powers or something like that.
But actually the roots of unity turn out to be a relatively tame concept in mathematics but also really
important for for example the 48 transform and other aspects of signal processing.
And once you learn about the roots of unity algebraic Klee then I will introduce you to plotting and
graphing the roots of unity and that will lead to a really beautiful plot in Python.
I think by the end of this video you will see a nice example of the intersection between math and art.
All right.
So let's get started.
So the roots of unity essentially just means that for some number z which is a complex number so a complex
value numbers said if you raise it to the end power then it equals 1.
Now on the one hand if you set end to be zero then this is a trivial equation because any number to
the power of zero is equal to 1 but if n is a larger number than zero let's say if n is five then it's
not so obvious what said should be in order to get Z to the end power to also be equal to 1 when n is
equal to 5 but it turns out that the solution the way to define Z is according to this formula.
So z equals the natural exponent so e to the power of and this whole expression is in the exponent of
E and that is to PI K divided by n so pi is the number three point one four and so on.
You see pi all over the place with circles.
I of course is the imaginary operator or the square root of minus 1 and k is a set of numbers that goes
from 0 to end minus 1.
So if n is 5 then K would be 0 1 2 3 4.
So then the idea is that for each value of k you put K into this formula that gives you a Z and then
you take Z to the end power and that will give you the number one and because K is defined as zero up
to and minus one then that means when N equals five then there are five roots of one.
So in other words for Z to the end there are N and roots.
Okay.
So what I'm gonna do now is switch to Python.
I will show you how to demonstrate this algebraic.
Just with numbers and then I'll show you how to make a plot that visualizes these complex roots of unity
and that will lead naturally into the exercise in this video we are going to be using several modules
including num pi simplify map plot lived up pi plot and the functions display and math from the Python
display module.
Okay so let's begin and actually let's begin with N equals 5 since that's the number I was talking about
in the slides.
So what I'm going to do here is loop through 4 k in range 0 to n and then what I'm going to do is compute
the n order or I should say the k if root of 1 and then print that out and hopefully we will see that
that equals the number 1.
So let's call this the root.
So I'll call this variable root.
So that was known PI that he XP and then we have two times pi.
So num piled up pi times the imaginary operator which I'm writing as 1 j here.
Times K and then divided by n and now actually I mean even just gonna run this cell already it's not
going to print out anything but it also didn't give me any error messages so that's a good sign.
Okay.
And now I'm just going to print out the root huh.
So this does not seem to correspond to the number one.
None of these is the number one.
So what's going on actually what's going on is that this is not yet the end root.
This is that number maybe I should have called it z and maybe it would have been a bit clearer.
So remember from the slides that once you put K into this natural exponent you then need to raise Z
to the power of n.
So let's try this again like this.
Mm hmm.
Okay so maybe you think there's still looks a little bit confusing but let's go through each of these
numbers in turn.
So this first number is 1 plus 0 j.
So that's really just the number 1.
So we get confirmation there.
How about here.
This is almost the number one is point 9 9 9 9.
So it's almost the number 1.
And then this is a complex number.
So the imaginary part is looks like it's minus 1 J.
But actually you have to notice this scientific notation here.
E to the minus 16.
So this is actually basically just zero plus computer rounding error.
And if you look down at these other ones you'll see this is one and then also a really really really
tiny number.
So this is basically a decimal point and then 16 zeros after that before you start getting to some non-zero
numbers.
Same business for all of these guys.
Now the reason why we are not getting exactly one and why there's a tiny tiny imaginary component here
is essentially because of how this number pi is computed.
This is not actually the real PI.
This is just pi estimated out to some number of digits.
So what I think we can do instead is use these simple a tool box or the simple module in order to get
pi and also e in terms of symbols not in terms of estimated numbers.
So now I'm basically just going to convert everything into simple so simple XP.
This is going to be Sim dot Pi.
And here I'm going to use SIM dot AI instead of I j.
And now let's see what happens.
Aha.
Now we get all ones.
Okay so this is looking good and now the last thing I want to do in this cell is just make this look
a little bit nicer.
So let's say display math and then what I want to do is basically say e to the power of all this stuff
raised to the ends.
Power gives us the number one.
So let's see.
That'll be percent as soon as I need it in quotes here.
Percent s and then I'll have a large write arrow.
This leads to percent.
So now we need to do our substitution.
So this first one is going to be Sim late tech said and then the second substitution is going to be
sin that late tech said to the power of n okay so this is looking a little bit better except it's actually
not totally totally accurate.
And that's because I made a little typo here or maybe I made it here.
Anyway the point is this is not actually correct.
What we need to do is say Z to the power of n.
So I'm gonna put parentheses around here and then carat and then another percent s and then here I'm
gonna need an okay.
So this number in here is the number z.
And then we raise that to the fifth power and then we get one.
All right.
So that is pretty neat.
And then it's worth checking that this works for other numbers as well.
So here are these seven seventh roots of unity.
And we can do 17 so these are the 17 17th roots of unity hot.
And actually now we've discovered a bug and I didn't even realize that this was there notice.
Now the one is in the superscript and the 7 is not in the superscript.
So in fact this needs to be in curly brackets like this all right.
This is looking better.
Okay.
Now we could do this all day go down to this but that's gonna end up just taking a really long time
and making lots and lots of printouts.
Let's keep this at about 4.
So this is already kind of interesting.
You see that the 4 4th roots of unity are 1.
And then I.
And then minus 1 and minus I.
And that is a good segway into what I want to show you next which is plotting these routes now.
Z is a complex number.
So that means that we can plot this complex number on a circle on a unit circle just like I showed you
in previous videos with the with graphing complex numbers.
So let's do that down here.
Let's say N equals 4.
And now essentially what I'm going to do is repeat some of this code but I'm going to display it instead
of printing it out.
So I will even copy and paste.
So here we compute the K if root of unity.
And then I'm going to plot it.
So how do we want to plot this.
So I want this to be a line that goes from the origin to this complex number here.
So you will recall we need to specify the x coordinates and then to y coordinates and we start at coordinate
x equals zero and Y equals zero.
And then we go up to X equals the real part of said and Y goes up to the imaginary part of Z.
All right.
So let's already run this and see what happens.
Mm hmm.
So we start getting some error messages.
And this is actually related to some interactions between simplify and num pi.
So what I'm going to do is convert all of these back from symbols into numbers so known PI that the
XP num paid out Pi.
And here this will go back to 1 j.
Okay.
So this is pretty funny.
We get a plus sign where each of the arms have a different color.
And in fact these correspond to these four numbers appear so appear the first root of unity is one which
you see here and then it's I.
Which is plotted up here remember this is a complex plane.
So this is one unit up on the imaginary axis.
So that's I.
And then minus one here and then minus I down here.
So then we can make this even larger about 14.
And now it looks like these lines are evenly distributed around the circle.
Now to make this point a little bit clearer I want to make the plot look a little bit nicer.
So one thing I'm going to do is make this a square plot.
OK.
So that already looks a little bit nicer.
And now what I think I would like to do is plot a circle around here so you can see that these lie on
the unit circle.
So you might remember how to do that from a previous video.
So we basically want to draw cosine of X by sine of X and I'm going to set the color to be gray.
So now what is x x was angles in radians that go from zero up to two pi.
So let's say x equals known pi.
Lynn space from zero to two pi.
Let's try a hundred steps.
Let's see how this looks.
That's num pi pi.
Now if you're a little bit confused about why I'm writing these two lines of code and how that produces
a circle you might want to go back and consult the video on plotting the unit circle.
Okay.
And then I also want to make this a little bit different so how about a dashed line like this actually.
Now I think it looks better just on its own.
Okay.
So this is pretty neat it's starting to look a bit like a like a wagon wheel.
And the interesting thing is that what the roots of unity are actually doing is finding evenly spaced
lines that go all the way around the unit circle like this.
So we can try this for how about seven.
So now it turns out that all seven of these lines are equally far apart from each other.
So that means if this were a pizza and you cut this into four or sorry seven slices then using the seven
roots of unity will give you exactly equally spaced slices the exercise for this video is to produce
a picture that looks like this.
And isn't this beautiful.
I think this looks really nice.
It has a bit of a kind of seashell like Fibonacci.
Kind of look to it and the colors go from black to white.
I just think this looks really beautiful.
So how did I create this.
Well of course I use the end roots of unity and then there's one tiny addition to the formula that you've
been working with.
So actually let me just make sure this is really clear.
So I generated this block by taking a formula that looks something like this except I modified it somehow.
Now if you would like to figure out how I modified it and basically produce this plot on your own without
me giving you any hints then now is your last opportunity to pause the video I am about to give you
a hint The hint is exactly the formula that you need to apply to get this thing to look like this.
Okay so here is the hint.
Essentially all you do is you take this exact same K number here and you also multiply the entire expression
by k.
So now K is this extra multiplicative term in front of the exponent.
All right.
So if you needed that hint then now you can pause video and go back and keep working on python.
Now I am going to switch to Python and show you my solution and let's see.
I think I will start with I'm going to put this in a new cell but I'm going to start with this same
code because it's kind of look pretty similar.
So what we need to do is multiply by K outside here and let's already see how this looks.
Okay so this you can kind of see it's going in the right direction.
The lines are spinning around and they're getting longer as they go around and let's see let's get rid
of this.
And I'm also going to turn off the axis axis off.
Okay so this is looking a little bit better.
Let's try and equals How about 50.
Right now this is starting to look a bit like a colorful seashell.
I'm gonna set this even higher to 200.
All right.
Looking better I want to make this line a little bit thicker so I can say line width equals to okay.
So now this is almost done except for the color.
So the way that I went about specifying this color is to start from black and then go up to not exactly
white.
If you go up to exactly white it gets invisible because the background is white.
So the way that I solved this is actually let me show you a kind of simpler way.
So you could write something like this color equals and then in a list you could say K divided by n
k divided.
K divided by an and K divided by n.
Now this kind of works.
It does start black and it gets lighter and lighter and maybe you think it looks better this way because
it fades smoothly into the sort of white ether of non-existence.
But I actually prefer to stop when it's still grey so I get a clear horizontal line here.
So again that is just my personal preference so I'm going to create a variable that goes from Lynn space
it goes from zero up to point nine in n steps.
And so that means that here this ends up being color.
So the K element of color cave element of color and the K element of color so now you can see that stops
when it's still gray.
And if you want it to be more gray you can set this to be for example point three.
And now that one doesn't look really good.
But anyway you get the idea.
Of course you're welcome to play around with these colors.
It's pretty interesting to see what you can do.
For example if you would fix the green value to be three then you get one that starts black and then
it goes into this kind of lavender dark purple into a kind of lavender ish purple the very last thing
I would like to point out in this video is that sometimes things can get a little bit confusing with
variable names and property names because notice I set this variable this vector to be color but then
I used it in here right after color.
So this color here is a keyword that the plot function is looking for.
And I called the variable name color as well.
Now I have to say I generally don't recommend setting your variables to be names that are also properties.
It can be a little bit confusing for exactly this reason.
So that's why I showed it to you.
All right.
This is a really fun video for me to make.
I hope you enjoyed it as well.
You learned about the roots of unity and you learn to make beautiful plots in Python.